Add design note on lifted transformations (#1267)
google/flax: docs/design_notes/lift.md

# Lifted transformation

⚠️ Advanced topic ⚠️

> This design note explains the underlying implementation of `flax.linen.transform` which enable JAX transformations inside `Module`.

Reviewer: Suggestion:

(unless `transform` in this context is plural)

```suggestion
This design note explains the underlying implementation of `flax.linen.transform`, which enables JAX transformations inside `Module`.
```

## Introduction

JAX uses a functional API meaning that it only garantuees correct behavior when using functions without side effects.

> Typically these side effects are the result of mutating an object that lives outside of the function.

Reviewer: Suggestion: "outside the function" w/o "of"

```suggestion
Typically, these side effects are the result of mutating an object that lives outside the function.
```

> The functional paradigm has some advantages like the ability to reason about state and stochasticity explicitly.

Reviewer: Suggestion: "the ability to reason explicitly about state and stochasticity"

```suggestion
The functional paradigm has some advantages like the ability to explicitly reason about state and stochasticity.
```

A function output can only change when the input arguments change.
Therefore, a function is garantueed to behave deterministicly.

> But pure functions offer another big advantage to JAX specifically: They enable functional transformations.

Reviewer: Maybe:

```suggestion
But pure functions offer another big advantage to JAX: specifically, they enable functional transformations.
```

For example `jax.vmap(f)` will vectorize a function `f`.

> Because `f` cannot have side-effects the vectorized/parallel version of `f` is well-defined. To see why we need this restriction, consider what happens if `f` would increment a counter or draw a random number.

Reviewer: Suggestion: "side effects" without the dash (for consistency)

```suggestion
Because `f` cannot have side effects the vectorized/parallel version of `f` is well-defined. To see why we need this restriction, consider what happens if `f` would increment a counter or draw a random number.
```

Would `f` draw the same or a different random number for each item in the vector?
Would each item in the batch have its own counter or is the counter shared among the items?
And in what order is the counter incremented if `f` is computed in parallel?
The anser to all these questions is "it depends".
The behavior is ambigious and the functional constraint elegantly avoids this problem.

Flax introduces a safe way to have limited randomness and stateful variables in a JAX compatible form.

> The reason state in Flax is not problematic is because it is local. Inside a flax `Module` there are variables and PRNG sequences,

Reviewer: Suggestion (correct me if I'm wrong): "The reason why the  state .. is not problematic is because..." (also "Flax" with a capital "F")

```suggestion
The reason why the state in Flax is not problematic is because it is local: inside a Flax `Module` there are variables and PRNG sequences,
```

but on the outside there are only JAX Arrays and PRNG keys.

> For most use cases Flax be used to define models in a stateful way.

Reviewer: Suggestion: "can" may be missing ("...Flax can be used...")

```suggestion
For most use cases, Flax can be used to define models in a stateful way.
```

> Becuase a `Module` behaves pure functional externally  we can utilize the full power of JAX with all of its transformations.

Reviewer: Suggestion: I think this should be reworded:

```
Because a `Module` behaves pure functional externally...
```
Also, "Because" (small typo).

Maybe:

```suggestion
Because a `Module` behaves like a pure function externally, we can utilize the full power of JAX with all of its transformations.
```

(Forgive me if I got this wrong)

> There are however cases where we want to have the best of both worlds by using transformations and Module together.

Reviewer: Suggestion: use backticks (formatting) for `Module` for consistency

```suggestion
There are, however, cases when we want to have the best of both worlds by using transformations and `Module` together.
```

> This design note explains how we extend JAX functional transformation to work on modules that have internal state and randomness.

Reviewer: Suggestion (although maybe I'm incorrect):

```suggestion
This design note explains how we extend JAX's functional transformation to work on `Module`s that have internal state and randomness.
```

## Functionalization

Before we jump into the details let's consider a simple example where we would like to use `vmap` inside a `Module`.

> First we define a simple MLP without any transformations:

Reviewer: Suggestion: nit (note the blank line)

```suggestion
First, we define a simple MLP without any transformations:

```

> ```

Reviewer: Suggestion: "```python" for improved rendering of Python code

import jax
from jax import random, numpy as jnp
from flax import linen as nn

class MLP(nn.Module):
  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, xs):
    h = nn.Dense(4, name='hidden')(xs)
    h = nn.relu(h)
    return nn.Dense(1, name='out')(h)
```

> Now what if I want to have seperate MLP parameters for each item in `xs`?

Reviewer: Suggestion: 
- for consistecy, maybe "we" > "I". 
- "separate" (typo fix)

```suggestion
Now, what if we want to have separate MLP parameters for each item in `xs`?
```

> If this where "vanilla JAX" we could imagene writing something like `jax.vmap(apply_mlp)(mlp_params, xs)`.

Reviewer: Suggestion:
- "imagine" (typo fix)
- proposal: "If we used "vanilla JAX" > "If this where "vanilla JAX" (or "this was" > "this where")

e.g.

```suggestion
If this was "vanilla JAX", we could imagine writing something like `jax.vmap(apply_mlp)(mlp_params, xs)`.
```

But doing something like this in linen will actually fail:

> ```

Reviewer: Suggestion (nit)

```suggestion

```python
```

class NaiveVmapMLP(nn.Module):
  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, xs):
    mlps = MLP()
    return jax.vmap(lambda mlp, x: mlp(x))(mlps, xs)  # fails
```

> JAX will refuse to transform the `mlps` because its not a JAX Array or a simple container of arrays.

Reviewer: Suggestion:

```suggestion
JAX will refuse to transform the `mlps` because it's not a JAX array or a simple container of arrays.
```

> We can't really blame JAX for refusing this dirty, underspecified task.

Reviewer: Suggestion (to avoid repetition):

```suggestion
We can't really blame JAX for not allowing this "dirty", underspecified task.
```

> After all it's not even clear what should happen here.

Reviewer: Suggestion (it):

```suggestion
After all, it's not even clear what should happen here.
```

> The parameters inside MLP are not even initialized yet and we will need a seperate PRNG key for each group of parameters.

Reviewer: Suggestion:
- "the MLP" (definite article)
- "separate" (typo fix)

```suggestion
The parameters inside the MLP are not even initialized yet and we will need a separate PRNG key for each group of parameters.
```

> We can fix this problem by first turning `MLP` into a pure init and apply function.

Reviewer: Suggestion (similar to how you used the formatting below):

```suggestion
We can fix this problem by first turning `MLP` into a pure `init` and `apply` function.
```

(or `.init`, `.apply`)

Author: Here we refer to an init/apply function not a particular one or the method that creates them.  So I think this should be text not code

Reviewer: Understood, thanks for clarifying this @jheek

Afterwards, we use the `param` method to store the parameters:

> ```

Reviewer: Suggestion (nit):

```suggestion

```python
```

class ManualVmap(nn.Module):
  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, xs):
    mlp = MLP(parent=None)
    init_fn = lambda rng, xs: jax.vmap(mlp.init, in_axes=0)(random.split(rng, xs.shape[0]), xs)['params']
    apply_fn = jax.vmap(mlp.apply, in_axes=0)
    mlp_params = self.param('mlp', init_fn, xs)
    return apply_fn({'params': mlp_params}, xs)

xs = jnp.ones((3, 4))
variables = ManualVmap().init(random.PRNGKey(0), xs)
print(jax.tree_map(jnp.shape, variables['params']))
"""==>
{
    mlp: {
        hidden: {
            bias: (3, 4),
            kernel: (3, 4, 4),
        },
        out: {
            bias: (3, 1),
            kernel: (3, 4, 1),
        },
    },
}
"""
```

> Here `MLP(parent=None)` creates a detached instance of `MLP`.

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
Here, `MLP(parent=None)` creates a detached instance of `MLP`.
```

This avoids reserving a name for the submodule inside the current module.
Although not strictly necessary, this also ensures we cannot accidentaly use the MLP instance in a stateful way and we are forced to use it through either `.init` or `.apply`.

This example is still relatively concise but it already takes a few extra "bookkeeping" statements to make it work.
However, this implementation has a number of limitations:

> 1. During initialization we call the submodule twice through `init_fn` & `apply_fn`. If the submodule used the same trick to do

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
1. During th initialization we call the submodule twice through `init_fn` and `apply_fn`. If the submodule used the same trick to do
```

   functional tranformation we will end up executing a lot of code as the number of module calls grows like 2^d where d is the number of
   nested function transformations.
2. The implemenation assumes the submodule only requires the parameter RNG sequence.

> 3. The implementation assumes we init parameters once and we don't create any state variables either during init or apply.

Reviewer: Suggestion:

```suggestion
3. The implementation assumes we `init` the parameters once and don't create any state variables either during `init` or `apply`.
```

or "initialize the parameters"

Point 3 in particular makes manual functionalization cumbersome. Feel free to try and extend the above example with a `nn.BatchNorm`

> layer in the `MLP` module. This should cause a number of complexites further growing the implementation. Like storing the updated

Reviewer: Suggestion (and correct me if I misunderstood this)

```suggestion
layer in the `MLP` module. This should increase the complexity of the implementation. Like storing the updated
```

(the original didn't look right (grammar) IMO)

> batch stats after apply and making sure state isn't mutable inside vmap when it's immutable outside (eval mode).

Reviewer: Suggestion:

```suggestion
batch stats after `apply` and making sure the state isn't mutable inside `vmap` when it's immutable outside (the `eval` mode).
```

> We call the process of transforming a stateful Module into a pure function "functionalization".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We call the process of transforming a stateful `Module` into a pure function "functionalization".
```

> By temporarily turning a stateful Module into a function we make it compatible with JAX's functional transformations.

Reviewer: Suggestion (for consistency):

```suggestion
By temporarily turning a stateful `Module` into a function we make it compatible with JAX's functional transformations.
```

## Lifting

> Flax provides an alternative for manual functionalization which we call lifted transformation.

Reviewer: Suggestion:

```suggestion
Flax provides an alternative for manual functionalization which we call a lifted transformation.
```

Lifted transformations are defined in `flax.core.lift`.
All the lifted JAX transformations are defined with a single generic lifting API called `pack`.

> A number of decision decisions had to be made in order to define `pack`. The implementation

Reviewer: Suggestion (repetition fix)

```suggestion
A number of decisions had to be made in order to define `pack`. The implementation
```

> of `pack` controls how variables and rngs are lifted and how fine-grained the user control is.

Reviewer: Suggestion (RNGs - capitalized acronym)

```suggestion
of `pack` controls how variables and RNGs are lifted and how fine-grained the user control is.
```

> It must also decide whether lifting decisions are made during variable definition or at the transformation.

Reviewer: Maybe: "at the transformation" < "during the transformation"

### Lifting granularity

> With the linen API, users can define arbitrary variable collections and PRNG sequences.

Reviewer: Suggestion ("Linen"):

```suggestion
With the Linen API, users can define arbitrary variable collections and PRNG sequences.
```

Each variable in a collection is lifted in the same way.

Collections are typically given a semantically meaningful name like "params" or "batch_stats" rather than a general purpose name like "state".
Because collections carry semantic meaning we can decide at the transformation level how each collection should be lifted.

> For example, we might decide to share parameters if we want to vectorize add a batch dimension to a model. 

Reviewer: Is it "vectorize a batch dimension" without "add"? Or, is it "if we want to add a vectorized batch dimension to a model"

Another suggestion:

```suggestion
For example, we may decide to share parameters if we want to vectorize add a batch dimension to a model. 
```

(might < may/could < will)

At the same time we can write generic code that uses transformations without knowing exactly what kind of variables the submodules will create.
Collections thus strike a balance between fine-grained control and generality.
We also avoid brittle string matching code that loops over all variables and tries to split up collections in an ad-hoc way based on

> naming conventions like: does this variable name have a prefix "kernel". 

Reviewer: Maybe there should be a "?" at the end of the sentence. 

E.g.
```suggestion
naming conventions like: does this variable name have a prefix "kernel"? 
```

> If more fine-grained control is necessary a user can simply split up a set of variables over multiple collections that should be handled differently.

Reviewer: Suggestion (add a coma which can help read the complex sentence)

```suggestion
If more fine-grained control is necessary, a user can simply split up a set of variables over multiple collections that should be handled differently.
```

### Transformation vs variable control

Lifting behavior could be defined either at the transformation level or during variable definition.
We use transformation level definitions of lifting behavior.
The reason for this choice is that there are many different transformations with various behaviors.
For example: `vmap` has broadcasted and vectorized arguments, while `scan` has scan, carry, and broadcast arguments.
A variable would have to define its behavior for all these transformations otherwise a `Module` would not be compatible with

> these tranformations. Or alternatively, we would have to make default decisions for how transformations are handled.

Reviewer: Suggestion (nit):
- "alternatively" may be sufficient without "or"
- "transformations" (fix typo)

```suggestion
these transformations. Alternatively, we would have to make default decisions for how the transformations are handled.
```

> However, this could lead to silent bugs becuase the behavior might not actually be valid given the users intent. 

Reviewer: Suggestion:

- small typo fix
- "the users intent" or "a user's intent" 🤷 

```suggestion
However, this could lead to silent bugs because the behavior might not actually be valid given a user's intent. 
```

> The lift package also provides a general purpose `transform` which allows an arbitrary function to transforms a variable collection.

Reviewer: Suggestion:

- "...function to transform a variable collection" (instead of "transforms")

```suggestion
The lift package also provides a general purpose `transform`, which allows an arbitrary function to transform a variable collection.
```

> This can be used to for example tie the weights in a tied autoencoder by transposing the weights.

Reviewer: Suggestion (refactor):

```suggestion
Fox example, this can be used to tie the weights in a tied autoencoder by transposing the weights.
```

Author: What is a fox example ;)

why can humans only detect spelling errors in text that they didn't generate? Clearly we are overfitting on our self-generated data

> It is unclear whether a similair general purpose transform could be defined if lifting decisions were made at variable definition.

Reviewer: Suggestion:

- (forgive me if I'm wrong) "during the ..definition" > "at ... definition"
- "similar" (typo fix)

```suggestion
It is unclear whether a similar general purpose transform could be defined if lifting decisions were made during the variable definition.
```

### Linen

> The lifting module does not know about linen Modules. Instead it operates directly on instances of `flax.core.Scope`.

Reviewer: Suggestion:

- "Linen"
- `Module` for consistency

```suggestion
The lifting module does not know about Linen `Module`s. Instead, it operates directly on instances of `flax.core.Scope`.
```

A `Scope` contains the variables and PRNG sequences of a `Module`. Each module has a `Scope` instance linked to it as long

> as its bound to a parent or it was created using a `init` or `apply`.

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
as it's bound to a parent or created using an `init` or `apply`.
```

> When a `Module` is transformed we use the `flax.core.lift` APIs to lift the scope and use `Module.clone()` to create a new `Module` instance with the lifted `Scope` bound to it.

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
When a `Module` is transformed, we use the `flax.core.lift` APIs to lift the scope and use `Module.clone()` to create a new `Module` instance with the lifted `scope` bound to it.
```

`flax.linen.transforms` exposes wrappers for the transformations in `flax.core.lift`. The core lifting APIs operate on functions while
the linen wrappers can transform either a `Module` class or a `Module` method.

> Lifting is thus implemented independently from the linen API. This seperation of concern simplifies the implementation while also allowing other Module APIs that chooce a different syntatic sugar for defining Modules to reuse the very generic and flexible `Scope `+ lift APIs for handling state and RNGs. 

Reviewer: Suggestion:

- Nit picking
- Typo fix ("separation", "syntactic", "choose")
- `Module`, `lift` and `scope` (of `flax.core`) for consistency

```suggestion
Thus, lifting is implemented independently from the Linen API. This separation of concern simplifies the implementation, while also allowing other `Module` APIs that choose a different syntactic sugar for defining `Module`s to reuse the very generic and flexible `scope `and `lift` APIs for handling state and RNGs. 
```

### Implementation

The `pack(fn, in_vars, out_vars, rngs)` API goes through the following stages:

1. *Scope deduplication*

    This stage is only relevant if multiple Scopes are lifted together.
    In this case we must first find the set of root scopes.

>     A scope is a root if none of its ancestors is in the set of scopes that is too be lifted.

Reviewer: Suggestion: some grammar stuff (correct me if I'm wrong)

e.g.

```suggestion
    A scope is a root if none of its ancestors are in the set of scopes that need to be lifted.
```

    By only lifting roots we avoid lifting the same variables twice.

    For non-root scopes we store a reference to its ancestor scope and a path such that we can later reconstruct it (stage 4).

2. *Filter stage*

>     Variables & PRNG sequences are split up into groups. This way `fn` can lift each group into the seperation seperatly.

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
    Variables and PRNG sequences are split up into groups. This way `fn` can lift each group into the seperation seperatly.
```

>     A group is defined by a filter which can be specified as:

Reviewer: Suggestion (nit):

```suggestion
    A group is defined by a filter, which can be specified as:
```

>     - a list of collections/prng names

Reviewer: Suggestion (capitalize the acronym (PRNG))

```suggestion
    - a list of collections/PRNG names
```

    - `True` (match everything)
    - `False` (match nothing)
    - `DenyList(filter)` (match everything but the specified filter).

>     A collection or PRNG sequence can only be put into a single group. If a collection matches multiple filters it will be put into

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
    A collection or a PRNG sequence can only be put into a single group. If a collection matches multiple filters, it will be put into
```

    the first group with a matching filter.

>     For example, `in_vars = (["params"], True)` will cause the "params" collection to be put in the first group and all other collection to be put in the second group.

Reviewer: Suggestion:

```suggestion
    For example, `in_vars = (["params"], True)` will cause the `"params"` collection to be put in the first group and all other collections — in the second group.
```

    For each PRNG sequence that is matched we seed a new PRNG sequence by calling `make_rng`.

>     This avoids the need to update the PRNG state after the lifted tranformation finishes.

Reviewer: Suggestion:

- "the ... transformation is complete" instead of "finishes"
- Fix typo ("transformation")

```suggestion
    This avoids the need to update the PRNG state after the lifted transformation is complete.
```

3. *Transform specific lifting*

    `fn` is called with the variable and PRNG groups.

>     JAX transform have varying signatures and lifting options. Arguably the cleanest example is `vmap`.

Reviewer: Nit ("JAX transforms" should be plural here IMO):

```suggestion
    JAX transforms have varying signatures and lifting options. Arguably, the cleanest example is `vmap`.
```

    In the case of vmap the function arguments, rngs and variable collections are passed into a `jax.vmap` wrappped function.

4. *Scope reconstruction*

>     Now that the variables and rngs are lifted inside the transformation, we want to recreate the lifted scopes. Pack calls

Reviewer: Suggestion ("RNGs"):

```suggestion
    Now that the variables and RNGs are lifted inside the transformation, we want to recreate the lifted scopes. Pack calls
```

>     `fn` with a `scope_fn` that takes the lifted variables and rngs and returns the reconstructed scopes with the lifted variables and rng sequences.

Reviewer: Suggestion ("RNGs")

```suggestion
    `fn` with a `scope_fn` that takes the lifted variables and RNGs and returns the reconstructed scopes with the lifted variables and RNG sequences.
```

5. *Repack stage*

    After we have used the lifted scopes we have to retrieve the updated variables (PRNG sequences can simply be discarded).
    pack passes the `repack_fn` to support this.
    This stage is similair to stage 2 except that we only lift variables and immutable variables are ignored.

>     Immutable variables cannot be updated so there is no reason to return them from the lifted transformation. 

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
    Immutable variables cannot be updated, so there is no reason to return them from the lifted transformation. 
```

6. *Commit stage*

    `pack` expects `fn` to return a pair where the first item will simply be returned from pack and the second item should be the repacked variables.

>     The updated variables are stored in the original/unlifted scopes such that the mutation that happened inside the transformation survive beyond the transformation boundary.

Reviewer: Suggestion:
- It "survives" or they "survive"
- I think the present tense would be OK here ("happens")

e.g.

```suggestion
    The updated variables are stored in the original/unlifted scopes, such that the mutation that happens inside the transformation survives beyond the transformation boundary.
```

### Using pack example

> A minimal example of using pack:

Reviewer: Suggestion: maybe this should be `pack` (with backticks):

```suggestion
A minimal example of using `pack`:
```

> ```

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
```python
```

from flax.core import lift
from flax.core import Scope, init, apply, nn as core_nn

def lift_id(fn, variables=True, rngs=True)
  def wrapper(scope_fn, repack_fn, variable_groups, rng_groups, *args):
    # normally we would first call into a JAX transform here...
    scope = scope_fn(variable_groups, rng_groups)
    y = fn(scope, *args)
    out_variables = repack_fn(scope)
    return y, out_variables

  return lift.pack(wrapper, (variables,), (variables,), (rngs,))

x = jnp.ones((3, 2))
y, params = init(lift_id(core_nn.dense))(random.PRNGKey(0), x, 4)
```

> Normallly users shouldn't have to 

Reviewer 2: shouldn't have to what?

> ### Supported transformatiosn

Reviewer 2: transformations

| Jax Transform | Supported in Linen? | Comments |
|-|-|-|
| vmap | ✅ |  |
| scan | ✅ | Carry variables cannot be initialized inside the scan body. |
| remat | ✅ |  |
| jit | ✅ | Current implementation might cause unnecessary recompilation. |
| pmap | ❌ |  |
| grad | ❌ |  |
| xmap | ❌ |  |
| custom_vjp | ❌ |  |
| custom_jvp | ❌ |  |

### Linen examples

> Going back to our original example we can now use the lifted vmap:

Reviewer: Suggestion (nit):

```suggestion
Going back to our original example, we can now use the lifted `vmap`:
```

> ```

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
```python
```

class LinenVmap(nn.Module):
  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, xs):
    VmapMLP = nn.vmap(MLP, variable_axes={'params': 0}, split_rngs={'params': True}, in_axes=0)
    return VmapMLP(name='mlp')(xs)

variables = LinenVmap().init(random.PRNGKey(0), xs)
print(jax.tree_map(jnp.shape, variables['params']))
"""==>
{
    mlp: {
        Dense_0: {
            bias: (3, 4),
            kernel: (3, 2, 4),
        },
        Dense_1: {
            bias: (3, 1),
            kernel: (3, 4, 1),
        },
    },
}
"""
```

> Here we use `variable_axes={'params': 0}` to indicate that paramaters are vectorized rather than shared and `split_rngs={'params': True}` means each set of parameters is initialized independently.

Reviewer: Nit (+ typo fix):

```suggestion
Here, we use `variable_axes={'params': 0}` to indicate that parameters are vectorized rather than shared, and `split_rngs={'params': True}` means each set of parameters is initialized independently.
```

We can also extend the example with some inner state by adding a `BatchNorm` layer:

```
class StatefulMLP(nn.Module):
  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, x):
    h = nn.Dense(4, name='hidden')(x)
    h = nn.BatchNorm(use_running_average=False, axis_name="batch")(h)
    h = nn.relu(h)
    return nn.Dense(1, name='out')(h)

class LinenStatefulVmap(nn.Module):
  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, xs):
    VmapMLP = nn.vmap(StatefulMLP, variable_axes={'params': 0, 'batch_stats': 0}, split_rngs={'params': True}, in_axes=0)
    return VmapMLP(name='mlp')(xs)
variables = LinenStatefulVmap().init(random.PRNGKey(0), xs)
```

> All we had to add to `nn.vmap` is `'batch_stats': 0` indicating the batch stats are vectorized rather than shared along the first axis.

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
All we had to add to `nn.vmap` is `'batch_stats': 0`, indicating that the batch stats are vectorized rather than shared along the first axis.
```

## Alternatives

Other numerical computation frameworks consider variables a first-class citizen.
An alternative to functionalization would be to use a variable system either integrated or on top of JAX.
An advantage of this is that per-variable lifting becomes easier.
If variables are part of the JAX IR (JAXPR), we could inspect which variables have to be lifted in a certain computation.
Optionally, they could be annotated with a collection tag to decide on various lifting options.

The downside of this approach is that a variable system is more complicated.

> Variables are related references and break a core assumption of Functional Programming (see [referentia transparency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Referential_transparency))

Reviewer 2: referential

# Lifted transformation

⚠️ Advanced topic ⚠️

> This design note explains the underlying implementation of `flax.linen.transform`, which enables JAX transformations inside `Module`.

Author: I'm always feeling a bit uncomfortable with plural of `ClassName`. I guess this is the least evil though

Typically, these side effects are the result of mutating an object that lives outside the function.

The functional paradigm has some advantages like the ability to explicitly reason about state and stochasticity.
The function output only changes when an input argument changes.
Therefore, a function is guaranteed to behave deterministically.

But pure functions offer another big advantage to JAX: specifically, they enable functional transformations.
For example `jax.vmap(f)` will vectorize a function `f`.
Because `f` cannot have side effects the vectorized/parallel version of `f` is well-defined. To see why we need this restriction, consider what happens if `f` would increment a counter or draw a random number.
Would `f` draw the same or a different random number for each item in the vector?
Would each item in the batch have its own counter or is the counter shared among the items?
And in what order is the counter incremented if `f` is computed in parallel?
The answer to all these questions is "it depends".
The behavior is ambiguous and the functional constraint elegantly avoids this problem.

> Flax introduces a safe way to have limited randomness and stateful variables in a JAX compatible form.

Reviewer 3: minor nit: "JAX-compatible"

The reason why the state in Flax is not problematic is because it is local: inside a Flax `Module` there are variables and PRNG sequences,
but on the outside there are only JAX Arrays and PRNG keys.

For most use cases, Flax is used to define models in a stateful way.
Because a `Module` behaves like a pure function externally, we can fully utilize JAX with all of its transformations.
There are, however, cases when we want to have the best of both worlds by using transformations and `Module` together.
This design note explains how we extend JAX's functional transformation to work on `Module`s that have internal state and randomness.

## Functionalization

Before we jump into the details let's consider a simple example where we would like to use `vmap` inside a `Module`.

First, we define a simple MLP without any transformations:

```python
import jax

> from jax import random, NumPy as jnp

Reviewer 3: it's `numpy` (lowercase)
anyways, usually we would say `import jax.numpy as jnp` on a separate line...

(also if you use `jax.random` instead of `random` then I don't think any import is needed in the example since they're pretty obvious)

Author: oops

from flax import linen as nn

class MLP(nn.Module):
  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, xs):
    h = nn.Dense(4, name='hidden')(xs)
    h = nn.relu(h)
    return nn.Dense(1, name='out')(h)
```

Now what if we want to have separate MLP parameters for each item in `xs`?
If this were "vanilla JAX" we could imagine writing something like `jax.vmap(apply_mlp)(mlp_params, xs)`.
But doing something like this in Linen will actually fail:

```python
class NaiveVmapMLP(nn.Module):
  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, xs):

>     mlps = MLP()

Reviewer 3: maybe `mlps = [MLP() for _ in xs.shape[0]]` ?
(depends what you want to highlight - but it looks weird having plural in the var name with a singular class name)

Author: I was thinking mlps because you vmap the MLP which is equivalent to applying a bunch of mlps in parallel. But maybe that's a bit confusing. I'll remove the plural here

variables = ManualVmap().init(random.PRNGKey(0), xs)
print(jax.tree_map(jnp.shape, variables['params']))
"""==>
{
    mlp: {
        hidden: {
            bias: (3, 4),
            kernel: (3, 4, 4),
        },
        out: {
            bias: (3, 1),
            kernel: (3, 4, 1),
        },
    },
}
"""
```

Here, `MLP(parent=None)` creates a detached instance of `MLP`.
This avoids reserving a name for the submodule inside the current module.
Although not strictly necessary, this also ensures we cannot accidentally use the MLP instance in a stateful way and we are forced to use it through either `.init` or `.apply`.

This example is still relatively concise but it already takes a few extra "bookkeeping" statements to make it work.
However, this implementation has a number of limitations:
1. During initialization, we call the submodule twice through `init_fn` and `apply_fn`. If the submodule used the same trick to do
   functional transformation we will end up executing a lot of code as the number of module calls grows like 2^d where d is the number of
   nested function transformations.
2. The implementation assumes the submodule only requires the parameter RNG sequence.

> 3. The implementation assumes we init parameters once and we don't create any state variables either during init or apply.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure I understand what you mean exactly by "assumes we init parameters once" ... when/why would we init parameters multiple times?

Author: clarified

The reason for this choice is that there are many different transformations with various behaviors.
For example: `vmap` has broadcasted and vectorized arguments, while `scan` has scan, carry, and broadcast arguments.
A variable would have to define its behavior for all these transformations otherwise a `Module` would not be compatible with
these transformations. Alternatively, we would have to make default decisions for how transformations are handled.
However, this could lead to silent bugs because the behavior might not actually be valid given the users intent. 

The lift package also provides a general purpose `transform`, which allows an arbitrary function to transform a variable collection.
For example, this can be used to tie the weights in a tied auto-encoder by transposing the weights.
It is unclear whether a similar general purpose transform could be defined if lifting decisions were made at variable definition.

### Linen

The lifting module does not know about the Linen `Module` API. Instead it operates directly on instances of `flax.core.Scope`.
A `Scope` instance contains the variables and PRNG sequences of a `Module`.

> Each module has a `Scope` instance linked if it is bound to a parent or it was created using `init` or `apply`.

Reviewer 3: This sentence is a bit hard to parse:
- What does "has a scope instance linked" mean exactly? (e.g. what's the alternative)
- It's not clear if it's "(has a scope instance linked if it is bound to a parent) or (it was created using init/apply)" vs. "has a scope instance linked (if it is bound to a parent) or (it was created using init/apply)"

Author: rephrased

Thus, lifting is implemented independently from the Linen API. This separation of concern simplifies the implementation, while potentially allowing alternative `Module` abstractions to build upon a common core for lifting and state management.

### Implementation

The `pack(fn, in_vars, out_vars, rngs)` API goes through the following stages:

1. *Scope de-duplication*

    This stage is only relevant if multiple Scopes are lifted together.
    In this case we must first find the set of root scopes.
    A scope is a root if none of its ancestors are in the set of scopes that need to be lifted.

    By only lifting roots we avoid lifting the same variables twice.

    For non-root scopes we store a reference to its ancestor scope and a path such that we can later reconstruct it (stage 4).

2. *Filter stage*

    Variables and PRNG sequences are split up into groups. This way `fn` can lift each group into the transformation separately.
    A group is defined by a filter specified as:
    - a list of collections/prng names
    - `True` (match everything)
    - `False` (match nothing)
    - `DenyList(filter)` (match everything but the specified filter).

>     A collection or PRNG sequence can only be put into a single group. If a collection matches multiple filters, it will be put into the first group with a matching filter.

Reviewer 3: (I think at this point it is not very clear what it means for a prng/variable to be lifted vs. not to be lifted.)

Author: add clarification on unlifted prng/variables

    For example, `in_vars = (["params"], True)` will cause the "params" collection to be put in the first group and all other collection to be put in the second group.

    For each PRNG sequence that is matched we seed a new PRNG sequence by calling `make_rng`.
    This avoids the need to update the PRNG state after the lifted transformation is complete.

> 3. *Transform specific lifting*

Reviewer 3: nit: transform-specific

    Now that the variables and PRNGs are lifted inside the transformation, we want to recreate the lifted scopes. Pack calls
    `fn` with a `scope_fn` that takes the lifted variables and PRNGs and returns the reconstructed scopes with the lifted variables and rng sequences.

5. *Repack stage*

    After we have used the lifted scopes we have to retrieve the updated variables (PRNG sequences can simply be discarded).
    pack passes the `repack_fn` to support this.
    This stage is similar to stage 2 except that we only lift variables and immutable variables are ignored.
    Immutable variables cannot be updated. Therefore, they should not be returned from the transformed function. 

6. *Commit stage*

    `pack` expects `fn` to return a pair where the first item will simply be returned from pack and the second item should be the repacked variables.
    The updated variables are stored in the original/un-lifted scopes such that the mutations that happen inside the transformation survive after the transformation completes.

### Using pack example

A minimal example of using `pack`:

```python
from flax.core import lift
from flax.core import Scope, init, apply, nn as core_nn

> def lift_id(fn, variables=True, rngs=True)

Reviewer 3: While this example is very concise, it might be interesting to expand it a little bit to an example where variables/rngs are selected by filter (i.e. some are lifted and others not).

Author: done

  def wrapper(scope_fn, repack_fn, variable_groups, rng_groups, *args):
    # normally we would first call into a JAX transform here...
    scope = scope_fn(variable_groups, rng_groups)
    y = fn(scope, *args)
    out_variables = repack_fn(scope)
    return y, out_variables

  return lift.pack(wrapper, (variables,), (variables,), (rngs,))

x = jnp.ones((3, 2))
y, params = init(lift_id(core_nn.dense))(random.PRNGKey(0), x, 4)
```

NOTE that most users should not need to interact with `pack` directly.
Please open a GitHub issue when you find a use case that is not supported yet by the existing lifted transformations.

### Supported transformations

> | Jax Transform | Supported in Linen? | Comments |

Reviewer 3: Maybe a link to the source would be practical here (or below).

| remat | ✅ |  |
| jit | ✅ | Current implementation might cause unnecessary recompilation. |
| pmap | ❌ |  |
| grad | ❌ |  |
| xmap | ❌ |  |
| custom_vjp | ❌ |  |
| custom_jvp | ❌ |  |

### Linen examples

Going back to our original example, we can now use `nn.vmap` to simplify our implementation:

```python
class LinenVmap(nn.Module):
  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, xs):
    VmapMLP = nn.vmap(MLP, variable_axes={'params': 0}, split_rngs={'params': True}, in_axes=0)
    return VmapMLP(name='mlp')(xs)

variables = LinenVmap().init(random.PRNGKey(0), xs)
print(jax.tree_map(jnp.shape, variables['params']))
"""==>
{
    mlp: {
        Dense_0: {
            bias: (3, 4),
            kernel: (3, 2, 4),
        },
        Dense_1: {
            bias: (3, 1),
            kernel: (3, 4, 1),
        },
    },
}
"""
```

Here we use `variable_axes={'params': 0}` to indicate that parameters are vectorized rather than shared and `split_rngs={'params': True}` means each set of parameters is initialized independently.

We can also extend the example with some inner state by adding a `BatchNorm` layer:

```python
class StatefulMLP(nn.Module):
  @nn.compact

>   def __call__(self, x):

Reviewer 3: Wouldn't we always to pass in `train` when using `BatchNorm`?

Author: done

but on the outside there are only JAX Arrays and PRNG keys.

For most use cases, Flax is used to define models in a stateful way.
Because a `Module` behaves pure functional externally  we can utilize the full power of JAX with all of its transformations.
There are, however, cases when we want to have the best of both worlds by using transformations and `Module` together.
This design note explains how we extend JAX's functional transformation to work on `Module`s that have internal state and randomness.

## Functionalization

Before we jump into the details let's consider a simple example where we would like to use `vmap` inside a `Module`.

First, we define a simple MLP without any transformations:

```
import jax
from jax import random, NumPy as jnp
from flax import linen as nn

class MLP(nn.Module):
  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, xs):
    h = nn.Dense(4, name='hidden')(xs)
    h = nn.relu(h)
    return nn.Dense(1, name='out')(h)
```

Now what if I want to have separate MLP parameters for each item in `xs`?
If this where "vanilla JAX" we could imagine writing something like `jax.vmap(apply_mlp)(mlp_params, xs)`.

> But doing something like this in linen will actually fail:

Reviewer: Suggestion (nit):

I'm not 100% sure whether we capitalize the first letter.

```suggestion
But doing something like this in Linen will actually fail:
```

# Lifted Transformations

⚠️ Advanced topic ⚠️

This design note explains the underlying implementation of `flax.linen.transform`, which enables JAX transformations inside `Module`s.

## Introduction

> JAX uses a functional API meaning that it only guarantees correct behavior when using functions without side effects.

Reviewer 4: You may want to cite https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/jax-101/01-jax-basics.html#differences-from-numpy

## Functionalization

Before we jump into the details let's consider a simple example where we would like to use `vmap` inside a `Module`.

First, we define a simple MLP without any transformations:

```python
import jax
from jax import random, numpy as jnp
from flax import linen as nn

class MLP(nn.Module):
  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, xs):
    h = nn.Dense(4, name='hidden')(xs)
    h = nn.relu(h)
    return nn.Dense(1, name='out')(h)
```

Now what if we want to have separate MLP parameters for each item in `xs`?
If this were "vanilla JAX" we could imagine writing something like `jax.vmap(apply_mlp)(mlp_params, xs)`.
But doing something like this in Linen will actually fail:

```python
class NaiveVmapMLP(nn.Module):
  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, xs):
    mlp = MLP()
    return jax.vmap(lambda mlp, x: mlp(x))(mlp, xs)  # fails
```

JAX will raise an error when `vmap` is used on `mlp` because it's not a JAX array or a simple container of arrays.
We can not really blame JAX for refusing to perform this under-specified job.
After all, it's not even clear what should happen here.

> The parameters inside the MLP are not even initialized yet and we will need a separate PRNG key for each group of parameters.

Reviewer 4: I think it may be confusing how the PRNG getting into the picture here. I think that it is doing so indirectly, because when this model will later be initialized it will be passed a PRNG, and we would like to specify that we want to pass a different key to each element of the input vector.

Author: Added some more clarificaiton here

We can fix this problem by first turning `MLP` into a pure init and apply function.
Afterwards, we use the `param` method to store the parameters:

```python

> class ManualVmap(nn.Module):

Reviewer 4: I suggest adding `MLP` as a suffix to all models, as done until this point.

the Linen wrappers can transform either a `Module` class or a `Module` method.

Thus, lifting is implemented independently from the Linen API. This separation of concern simplifies the implementation, while potentially allowing alternative `Module` abstractions to build upon a common core for lifting and state management.

### Implementation

The `pack(fn, in_vars, out_vars, rngs)` API goes through the following stages:

1. *Scope de-duplication*

    This stage is only relevant if multiple Scopes are lifted together.
    In this case we must first find the set of root scopes.
    A scope is a root if none of its ancestors are in the set of scopes that need to be lifted.

    By only lifting roots we avoid lifting the same variables twice.

    For non-root scopes we store a reference to its ancestor scope and a path such that we can later reconstruct it (stage 4).

2. *Filter stage*

    Variables and PRNG sequences are split up into groups. This way `fn` can lift each group into the transformation separately.
    A group is defined by a filter specified as:
    - a list of collections/prng names
    - `True` (match everything)
    - `False` (match nothing)

>     - `DenyList(filter)` (match everything but the specified filter).

Reviewer 4: Do you meant to say `DenyList(list_of_collections)` instead of `DenyList(filter)`?

Author: DenyList can compose with an arbitrary filter (we need this internally).

Reviewer 4: The only compositions that are possible are: DenyList(list), DenyList(True), DenyList(False), DenyList(DenyList(...)), right? Of these only the first one seems to make sense. Also, since the name was `DenyList` and `DenyFilter`, I assume you meant to use it with a list.

Author: Added some clarification

    A collection or PRNG sequence can only be put into a single group. If a collection matches multiple filters, it will be put into the first group with a matching filter.
    If a collection or PRNG sequence does not match any filter it will not be lifted.

>     This means that it cannot be used inside the transformation and and attempting to do this will cause an error to be raised.

Reviewer 4: "and and"

5. *Repack stage*

    After we have used the lifted scopes we have to retrieve the updated variables (PRNG sequences can simply be discarded).
    pack passes the `repack_fn` to support this.
    This stage is similar to stage 2 except that we only lift variables and immutable variables are ignored.
    Immutable variables cannot be updated. Therefore, they should not be returned from the transformed function. 

6. *Commit stage*

    `pack` expects `fn` to return a pair where the first item will simply be returned from pack and the second item should be the repacked variables.
    The updated variables are stored in the original/un-lifted scopes such that the mutations that happen inside the transformation survive after the transformation completes.

### Using pack example

A minimal example of using `pack` to transpose each matrix in a variable collection:

```python
from flax.core import lift
from flax.core import Scope, init, apply, nn as core_nn

def lift_transpose(fn, target='params', variables=True, rngs=True)
  # by default we transpose 'params' and simply pass through all other variables.

>   def wrapper(scope_fn, repack_fn, variable_groups, rng_groups, *args):

Reviewer 4: I would suggest adding some typing annotations here

    # normally we would first call into a JAX transformed function here...
    target, rest = variable_groups
    def trans(x):
      if x.ndim == 2:
        return x.T
      return x
    target = jax.tree_map(trans, target)
    variable_groups = (target, rest)
    scope = scope_fn(variable_groups, rng_groups)
    y = fn(scope, *args)
    out_variables = repack_fn(scope)
    return y, out_variables

>   return lift.pack(wrapper, (target, variables), (variables,), (rngs,))

Reviewer 4: I would suggest a comment here with the signature of `lift.pack(fn, in_vars, out_vars, rngs)`

x = jnp.ones((3, 2))

> y, params = init(lift_id(core_nn.dense))(random.PRNGKey(0), x, 4)

Reviewer 3: `lift_transpose`

```

NOTE that most users should not need to interact with `pack` directly.
Please open a GitHub issue when you find a use case that is not supported yet by the existing lifted transformations.

### Supported transformations

| Jax Transform | Supported in Linen? | Comments |
|-|-|-|
| vmap | ✅ |  |
| scan | ✅ | Carry variables cannot be initialized inside the scan body. |
| remat | ✅ |  |
| jit | ✅ | Current implementation might cause unnecessary recompilation. |
| pmap | ❌ |  |
| grad | ❌ |  |
| xmap | ❌ |  |
| custom_vjp | ❌ |  |
| custom_jvp | ❌ |  |

References:
- [Linen transforms documentation](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/flax.linen.html#module-flax.linen.transforms).
- [Linen transforms source code](https://github.com/google/flax/blob/master/flax/linen/transforms.py)

> - [Core lifting source code](https://github.com/google/flax/blob/master/flax/core/lift.py)

Reviewer 3: Should we link back from the source to RTD?

(`lift.pack` has very terse documentation currently :-)

Author: Probably. I think the core docs need some more thought and love. I'll do that in a seperate PR

### Linen examples

Going back to our original example, we can now use `nn.vmap` to simplify our implementation:

```python
class LinenVmap(nn.Module):
  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, xs):
    VmapMLP = nn.vmap(MLP, variable_axes={'params': 0}, split_rngs={'params': True}, in_axes=0)
    return VmapMLP(name='mlp')(xs)

variables = LinenVmap().init(random.PRNGKey(0), xs)
print(jax.tree_map(jnp.shape, variables['params']))
"""==>
{
    mlp: {
        Dense_0: {
            bias: (3, 4),
            kernel: (3, 2, 4),
        },
        Dense_1: {
            bias: (3, 1),
            kernel: (3, 4, 1),
        },
    },
}
"""
```

Here we use `variable_axes={'params': 0}` to indicate that parameters are vectorized rather than shared and `split_rngs={'params': True}` means each set of parameters is initialized independently.

We can also extend the example with some inner state by adding a `BatchNorm` layer:

```python
class StatefulMLP(nn.Module):
  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, x, *, train):
    h = nn.Dense(4, name='hidden')(x)

>     h = nn.BatchNorm(axis_name="batch")(h, use_running_average=not train)

Reviewer 4: Single quotes to match the rest of the strings?

    h = nn.relu(h)
    return nn.Dense(1, name='out')(h)

class LinenStatefulVmap(nn.Module):
  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, xs, *, train):

>     VmapMLP = nn.vmap(StatefulMLP, variable_axes={'params': 0, 'batch_stats': 0}, split_rngs={'params': True}, in_axes=0)

Reviewer 4: I am guessing that `batch_stats` is the name of the collection that `nn.BatchNorm` is using?

Author: yes

    return VmapMLP(name='mlp')(xs, train=train)
variables = LinenStatefulVmap().init(random.PRNGKey(0), xs)
```

All we had to add to `nn.vmap` is `'batch_stats': 0`, indicating that the batch stats are vectorized rather than shared along the first axis.

> ## Alternatives

Author: Let's consider this for a follow up PR

### Linen

The lifting module does not know about the Linen `Module` API.
Instead it operates directly on instances of `flax.core.Scope`.
A `Scope` instance contains the variables and PRNG sequences of a `Module`.
Each `Module` instance has a `Scope` instance in the `.scope` field if it has a parent or it was created using `init` or `apply`.

> Typically, the top-level `Module` instance on which you call `init` or `apply` is the only `Module` instance that does not have a `Scope` bound to it.

Reviewer: Suggestion (nit):

- Because there are several moving parts and new material for new users, I suggest the following to help the audience digest this:

```suggestion
Typically, the top-level `Module` instance—on which you call `init` or `apply`—is the only `Module` instance that does not have a `Scope` bound to it.
```

LMKWYT 👍

Author: Agree
